---
title: "Dissertation Abstract: Hearing Aid Fitting with Genetic Algorithms"
---

by Eric Alan Durant

Chair: Gregory H. Wakefield

Hearing aids are controlled by numerous parameters, presenting the audiologist
with a difficult fitting task. While many of these parameters can be set near
their optimal values using prescriptive formulas based on simple measurements of
the patient's hearing loss, others are a matter of comfort and other qualities
that the patient must evaluate subjectively. Thus, there is much interest in
including the patient's preferences as a key element of the fitting process.

To accomplish this, various researchers have looked to mathematical optimization
theory. As the number and complexity of hearing aid parameters increase, the
shortcomings of these methods become burdensome. To overcome these shortcomings,
we investigate the genetic algorithm (GA). The GA is a search procedure that
borrows many concepts from biology, including natural selection and genetic
crossover and mutation. The GA maintains a population of solutions (hearing aid
parameter sets) and repeatedly replaces the least fit solutions with the
offspring of better performing solutions. In this thesis, methods are developed
for applying the GA to hearing aid fitting. These include an efficient procedure
to determine the relative quality of solutions in the population by repeatedly
asking the patient to select the better of two alternatives.

To evaluate our approach, we conducted two experiments with eight normal hearing
and eight hearing-impaired subjects. In the first, three parameters were varied
to control the cancellation of feedback, a common problem in which objects near
the aid and certain motions cause it to squeal. In the second, six parameters
were varied to fit three-band dynamic range expansion, which controls tradeoffs
between suppressing unwanted background sounds and sufficiently amplifying
desired sounds such as speech.

We found that the GA worked very well for fitting the feedback cancellation
system, using both objective and subjective measures. In addition, we learned
that patients have greatly differing preferences for feedback cancellation
parameters and that these preferences do not change much when subjects are
retested. The results for the expansion system were also positive, but
highlighted some problems and suggested changes that might be made to improve
performance when fitting more complicated parameter sets.
